CHAPTER I.
The former treaties have I made, O Theophilus, of all that Jesus began both to do and teach, until the day in which he was taken up, after that he, through the Holy Ghost, had given commandments unto the apostles whom he had chosen, to whom also he showed himself alive after his passion by many infallible proofs, being seen of them forty days, and speaking of the things pertaining to the kingdom of God.
And, being assembled together with them, commanded them that they should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the Father, which, saith he, ye have heard of me. For John truly baptized with water, but ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence.
When they, therefore, were come together, they asked of him, saying, Lord, wilt thou at this time restore again the kingdom to Israel? And he said unto them, It is not for you to know the times or the seasons which the Father hath put in his own power, but ye shall receive power, after that the Holy Ghost is come upon you.
And ye shall be witnesses unto me both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost part of the earth.
And when he had spoken these things, while they beheld, he was taken up, and a cloud received him out of their sight. And while they looked steadfastly toward heaven as he went up, behold, two men stood by them in white apparel, which also said, Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven?
The same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven.
Then returned they unto Jerusalem from the mount called Olivet, which is from Jerusalem a Sabbath-day's journey. And when they were come in, they went up into an upper room, where abode both Peter and James and John and Andrew, Philip and Thomas, Bartholomew and Matthew, James the son of Alphaeus, and Simon's Elotes, and Judas the brother of James.
These all continued, with one accord in prayer and supplication, with the women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brethren. And in those days Peter stood up in the midst of the disciples, and said, The number of names together were about 120.
Men and brethren, this scripture must needs have been fulfilled, which the Holy Ghost by the mouth of David spake before concerning Judas, which was guide to them that took Jesus. For he was numbered with us, and had obtained part of this ministry.
Now this man purchased a field with the reward of iniquity, and falling headlong, he burst asunder in the midst, and all his bowels gushed out.
And it was known unto all the dwellers of Jerusalem insomuch as that field is called in their proper tongue a Keldema, that is to say the field of blood. For it is written in the book of Psalms, Let his habitation be desolate, And let no man dwell therein, And his bishopric let another take.
Wherefore of these men, which have accompanied with us all the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out among us, beginning from the baptism of John, unto the same day that he was taken up from us, must one be ordained to be a witness with us of his resurrection.
And they appointed to Joseph called Barsabbas, who was surname Justus, and Mathias. And they prayed and said, Thou Lord, which knowest the hearts of all men, show whether of these two thou hast chosen, that he may take part of this ministry and apostleship, from which Judas by transgression fell, that he might go to his own place.
And they gave forth their lots, and the lot fell upon Mathias, and he was numbered with the eleven apostles.
And when the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all with one accord in one place. And suddenly there came a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they were sitting.
And there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as a fire, and it sat upon each of them. And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them utterance.
And there were dwelling at Jerusalem Jews, devout men, out of every nation under heaven. Now when this was noised abroad, the multitude came together and were confounded, because that every man heard them speak in his own language.
And they were all amazed and marvelled, saying one to another, Behold, are not all these which speak Galileans? And how hear we every man in our own tongue, wherein we were born?
Parthians and Medes and Elamites, and the dwellers in Mesopotamia, and in Judea and Cappadocia and Pontius, and Asia, Phrygia and Pamphylia, in Egypt, and in the parts of Libya about Cyrene, and strangers of Rome, Jews and proselytes, Cretes and Arabians, we do hear them speak in our tongues, the wonderful works of God.
And they were all amazed, and were in doubt, saying one to another, What meaneth this?
Others mocking said, These men are full of new wine.
But Peter, standing up with the eleven, lifted up his voice, and said unto them, Ye men of Judea, and all ye that dwell at Jerusalem, be this known unto you and hearken to my words.
For these are not drunken, as ye suppose, seeing it is but the third hour of the day.
But this is that which was spoken by the prophet Joel.
And it shall come to pass, In the last days saith God, I will pour out of my spirit upon all flesh.
And your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, And your young men shall see visions, And your old men shall dream dreams.
And on my servants, and on my handmaidens, I will pour out in those days of my spirit, And they shall prophesy.
And I will show wonders in heaven above, And signs in the earth beneath, Blood and fire and vapor of smoke.
The sun shall be turned into darkness, And the moon into blood, Before the great and notable day of the Lord come.
And it shall come to pass, That whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved.
Ye men of Israel, hear these words.
Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God among you by miracles and wonders and signs,
which God did by him in the midst of you, as ye yourselves also know.
Him, being delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, ye have taken,
and by wicked hands have crucified and slain, whom God hath raised up.
Having loosed the pains of death, because it was not possible that he should beholden of it.
For David speaketh concerning him. I foresaw the Lord always before my face,
for he is on my right hand that I should not be moved.
Therefore did my heart rejoice, and my tongue was glad.
Moreover, also my flesh shall rest in hope.
Because thou wilt not leave my soul in hell, neither wilt thou suffer thine holy one to seek corruption.
Thou hast made known to me the ways of life. Thou shalt make me full of joy with thy countenance.
Men and brethren, let me freely speak unto you of the patriarch David,
that he is both dead and buried, and his supplicer is with us unto this day.
Therefore, being a prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with an oath to him,
that of the fruit of his loins according to the flesh he would raise up Christ to sit on his throne,
he, seeing this before, spake of the resurrection of Christ,
that his soul was not left in hell, neither his flesh did seek corruption.
This Jesus hath God raised up, whereof we all are witnesses.
Therefore, being by the right hand of God exalted, and having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Ghost,
he hath shed forth this, which ye now see and hear.
For David is not ascended into the heavens, but he saith himself,
The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand, until I make thy foes thy footstool.
Therefore, let all the house of Israel know assuredly that God hath made the same Jesus,
whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ.
Now when they heard this, they were pricked in their heart, and said unto Peter,
and to the rest of the apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do?
Then Peter said unto them, Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ,
for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost.
For the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call.
And with many other words did he testify, and exhort, saying,
Save yourselves from this untoward generation.
Then they that gladly received his word were baptized, and the same day there were added unto them about three thousand souls.
And they continued steadfastly in the apostles' doctrine, and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers.
And fear came upon every soul, and many wonders and signs were done by the apostles.
And all that believed were together, and had all things common, and sold their possessions and goods, and parted them to all men, as every man had need.
And they, continuing daily with one accord in the temple, and breaking bread from house to house, did eat their meat with gladness and singleness of heart, praising God, and having favor with all the people.
And the Lord added to the church daily, such as should be saved.
Chapter 3
Now Peter and John went up together into the temple at the hour of prayer, being the ninth hour.
And a certain lame man from his mother's womb was carried, whom they laid daily at the gate of the temple, which is called Beautiful, to ask alms of them that entered into the temple.
Who, seeing Peter and John about to go into the temple, asked in alms.
And Peter, fastening his eyes upon him with John, said, Look on us.
And he gave heed unto them, expecting to receive something of them.
Then Peter said, Silver and gold have I none.
But such as I have, give I thee.
In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, rise up and walk.
And he took him by the right hand, and lifted him up, and immediately his feet and ankle bones received strength.
And he, leaping up, stood and walked, and entered with them into the temple, walking and leaping and praising God.
And all the people saw him, walking and praising God.
And they knew that it was he which sat for alms at the beautiful gate of the temple.
And they were filled with wonder and amazement at that which had happened unto him.
And as the lame man which was healed held Peter and John, all the people ran together unto them in the porch that is called Solomon's.
Greatly wondering.
And when Peter saw it, he answered unto the people, Ye men of Israel, why marvel ye at this?
Why look ye so earnestly on us, as though by our own power or holiness we had made this man to walk?
The God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob, the God of our fathers, hath glorified his son Jesus, whom ye delivered up,
and denied him in the presence of Pilate, when he was determined to let him go.
But ye denied the Holy One, and the Just, and desired a murderer to be granted unto you,
and killed the Prince of Life, whom God hath raised from the dead, whereof we are witnesses.
And his name, through faith in his name, hath made this man strong, whom ye see and know,
yea, the faith which is by him hath given him this perfect soundness in the presence of you all.
And now, brethren, I want that through ignorance ye did it, as did also your rulers.
But those things which God before had shewed by the mouth of all his prophets, that Christ should suffer, he hath so fulfilled.
Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out,
when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord, and he shall send Jesus Christ,
which before was preached unto you, whom the heaven must receive until the times of restitution of all things,
which God hath spoken by the mouth of all his holy prophets since the world began.
For Moses truly said unto the fathers, A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your brethren like unto me,
him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall say unto you.
And it shall come to pass that every soul which will not hear that prophet shall be destroyed from among the people,
yea, and all the prophets from Samuel and those that follow after, as many as have spoken, have likewise foretold of these days.
Ye are the children of the prophets, and of the covenant which God made with our fathers,
saying unto Abraham, And in thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed.
Unto you first, God, having raised up his son Jesus, sent him to bless you, and turning away every one of you from his iniquities.